= Ruby on Rails -- Introductory Workshop

October 30th 2015 - VIA University Horsens

By {Ásgeir Gunnarsson}[http://www.sonnur.dk] and {Lars Hoeg}[https://github.com/lhoeg].

See the {slides}[http://slides.com/lhoeg/deck] from this workshop.

== Getting started

A laptop with Ruby on Rails installed and a good code editor is a prerequisite for this workshop.

There are a few guides to help you install Ruby, Rails and other tools needed;

* {RailsBridge Installfest}[http://docs.railsbridge.org/installfest/choose_your_operating_system]

* {RailsInstaller}[http://railsinstaller.org/en] and {SSL error workaround}[https://gist.github.com/luislavena/f064211759ee0f806c88] (in case you get this error after installation)

As code editor one example is {Sublime Text 2}[http://www.sublimetext.com/2].

== Case: Suggestotron

The case we used as base for the workshop is RailsBridge {Intro to Rails - Suggestotron}[http://docs.railsbridge.org/intro-to-rails/], starting from {Getting Started}[http://docs.railsbridge.org/intro-to-rails/getting_started] section.

This Github project is a quick run-through of the case used in our workshop, plus a few suggestions for further development.

_Note_: If you haven't installed Node.js (or another Javascript interpreter), you may see an error.
Remove the <tt>javascript_include_tag</tt>-line (line 6) in the application layout file <tt>app/views/layouts/application.html.erb</tt>for now if this is the case.

You can follow my track commit-by-commit as I walk through this guide, and making the extra additions explained below.

=== Further steps

==== Super Simple Styling with Twitter Bootstrap

Adding {Twitter Bootstrap}[http://getbootstrap.com] is a very simple way to make even a quick testing project much more appealing in a matter of seconds.
Here we will use the {bootstrap-sass}[https://github.com/twbs/bootstrap-sass] gem.

First, edit your project's <tt>Gemfile</tt> and add:

  gem 'bootstrap-sass'

and run <tt>bundle install</tt>.

_Note:_ You will have to restart the Rails server after adding gems to your Gemfile.

Then change the application css file to {scss}[http://sass-lang.com]:

  git mv app/assets/stylesheets/application.css app/assets/stylesheets/application.scss

(you have been using git for each step along the way, right?)

Add to <tt>app/assets/stylesheets/application.scss</tt>:

  // "bootstrap-sprockets" must be imported before "bootstrap" and "bootstrap/variables"
  @import "bootstrap-sprockets";
  @import "bootstrap";

and to <tt>app/assets/javascripts/application.js</tt> below <tt>//= require jquery</tt>:

  //= require bootstrap-sprockets

When you reload the page in your browser, you should notice the font just changed, but not a whole lot more. Yet...

Remove Rails' default scaffolding stylesheet as it will get in our way!

  git rm app/assets/stylesheets/scaffolds.scss

Now edit your application layout <tt>app/views/layouts/application.html.erb</tt> and replace

  <%= yield %>

with

  <div class="container">
    <%= yield %>
  </div>

Edit your index view <tt>app/views/topics/index.html.erb</tt> and add a few Bootstrap-classes; change:

  <table>

to

  <table class="table">

and:

  <td><%= button_to '+1', upvote_topic_path(topic), method: :post %></td>

to

  <td><%= button_to '+1', upvote_topic_path(topic), method: :post, class: "btn btn-success" %></td>

and:

  <%= link_to 'New Topic', new_topic_path %>

to

  <%= link_to 'New Topic', new_topic_path, class: "btn btn-primary" %>

Reload the page and enjoy!

==== Nav-bar and footer

Edit the application layout <tt>app/views/layouts/application.html.erb</tt> and add the following HTML code right after the <tt>\<body></tt> tag:

  <nav class="navbar navbar-default navbar-fixed-top" role="navigation">
    <div class="container">
      <div class="navbar-header">
        <button type="button" class="navbar-toggle" data-toggle="collapse" data-target=".navbar-collapse">
          <span class="sr-only">Toggle navigation</span>
          <span class="icon-bar"></span>
          <span class="icon-bar"></span>
          <span class="icon-bar"></span>
        </button>
        <a class="navbar-brand" href="/">The Suggestotron app</a>
      </div>
      <div class="collapse navbar-collapse">
        <ul class="nav navbar-nav">
          <li class="active"><a href="/topics">Topics</a></li>
        </ul>
      </div>
    </div>
  </nav>

and just before the <tt>\</body></tt> tag add:

  <footer class="well">
    <div class="container">
      Ruby on Rails Workshop -- VIA University Horsens -- October 30th 2015
    </div>
  </footer>

We then need a few extra bits of styling to set the page right; edit <tt>/app/assets/stylesheets/application.scss</tt> and append:

  body { padding-top: 60px; }
  footer { margin-top: 40px; }

Refresh your browser to see the result.

==== Upload an image

Wouldn't it be nice if you could just upload a picture to show with each Topic?
The {carrierwave}[https://github.com/carrierwaveuploader/carrierwave] gem is one option here.

First, edit <tt>Gemfile</tt> and add:

  gem 'carrierwave'

and run <tt>bundle install</tt>.

We then need to generate an Uploader (it is just a Ruby class; take a look under <tt>app/uploaders</tt>):

  rails generate uploader Picture

Btw, don't forget to restart the server.

We also need a new field on Topic to put information about the image; let's call it *picture*:

  rails g migration add_picture_to_topics picture:string
  rake db:migrate

The Topic model needs to know how to handle an uploaded image; for this we add the following line to <tt>app/models/topic.rb</tt>:

  mount_uploader :picture, PictureUploader

As Rails 4+ uses attribute whitelisting in hte controllers to prevent updating fields you are not allowed to, we also need to add the picture field here; open <tt>app/controllers/topics_controller.rb</tt> and near the bottom of the file change:

  def topic_params
    params.require(:topic).permit(:title, :description)
  end

to

  def topic_params
    params.require(:topic).permit(:title, :description, :picture)
  end

We then need to update the form with a file upload field, so open <tt>app/views/topics/_form.html.erb</tt> in your editor and add below the other input fields:

  <div class="field">
    <%= f.label :picture %><br>
    <%= f.file_field :picture, accept: "image/*;capture=camera" %>
  </div>

Uploading a file via HTTP(s) requires a a multipart HTTP request, we also need to change the line at the top:

  <%= form_for(@topic) do |f| %>

to

  <%= form_for @topic, :html => {:multipart => true} do |f| %>

Oh, and we need to show the image also.
Open the *show* view <tt>app/views/topics/show.html.erb</tt> and add:

  <%= image_tag(@topic.picture_url, :width => 200) if @topic.picture.present? %>

You also want to avoid the uploaded files being added to your git repository, so add to <tt>.gitignore</tt>:

  public/uploads

==== Add image thumbnail on Topic index

It would also be nice to see a thumbnail on the Topic index page.
So far we the uploaded image is just saved under `public/uploads`, but we could easily add post processing such as scaling the image to different formats etc.

Add the 'mini_magick' gem (you should know how by now).

We need to tell the uploader to resize the image to a new format.
Edit <tt>app/uploaders/picture_uploader.rb</tt>.  Uncomment the line <tt>include CarrierWave::MiniMagick</tt> and add just below:

  version :thumb do
    process :resize_to_fill => [50, 50]
  end

Edit <tt>app/views/topics/show.html.erb</tt> and add a dolumn the the table:

  <th>Title</th>
  ...

to

  <th>Title</th>
  <th>Photo</th>
  ...

and

  <td><%= link_to topic.title, topic %></td>
  ...

to

  <td><%= link_to topic.title, topic %></td>
  <td><%= image_tag topic.picture_url(:thumb) if topic.picture? %></td>
  ...

_Note_: Any previously uploaded images will not have this size yet, but it will happen automatically for newly uploaded images.
The documentation will tell how to create the missing sizes/versions for existing images (hint: look for <tt>recreate_versions!</tt> method).

==== Further improvements

You may also like to improve:

* Styling
  * Style the add/edit form and show view page
  * Make add/edit/deleteback buttons display Twitter bootstrap {Glyphicons}[http://getbootstrap.com/components/#glyphicons]
  * Wysiwyg editor for description
  * Replace table on index page with 3-column grid display

* Uploaded image
  * Show default image
  * Crop/resize image after upload

* Security
  * User authentication using {Devise}[https://github.com/plataformatec/devise] gem, {hint}[http://guides.railsgirls.com/devise/]
  * Configure email
  * Sign-in/-up links in top nav-bar
  * Style sign-in/-up forms
  * User authorization (permissions)

* Add commenting using {acts_as_commentable}[https://github.com/jackdempsey/acts_as_commentable] gem

* Multi-language using built-in `I18n` and <tt>config/locales</tt> files

* Deploy your project onto {Heroku}[https://www.heroku.com]
  * Add SSL Certificate

* User image; {Gravatar}[http://en.gravatar.com] or uploadable file

* Testing!!!

* ...

== How to get on from here?

=== Learning Ruby

There are many great ressources on the internet for learning the Ruby language; I'll point you to a few just to get a head start;

* {Ruby in Twenty Minutes}[https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/quickstart/]

* {TryRuby}[http://tryruby.org/]

* {Why's (Poignant) Guide to Ruby}[http://poignant.guide]

* RailsBridge {Ruby Language}[http://docs.railsbridge.org/intro-to-rails/ruby_language)]

* {rubygems.org}[https://rubygems.org]

* {Ruby5}[https://ruby5.codeschool.com]

* {Ruby Tapas}[http://www.rubytapas.com]

* See more on {ruby-lang.org}[https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/]

=== Learning Rubu on Rails

There are also a huge number of online resources, e.g.;

* {Ruby on Rails}[http://rubyonrails.org]

* {Ruby on Rails Guides}[http://guides.rubyonrails.org]

* {RailsCasts}[http://railscasts.com]

* {Rails Beginner Cheat Sheet}[http://www.pragtob.info/rails-beginner-cheatsheet/]

* {Learn Ruby on Rails (book)}[https://www.railstutorial.org/book]

* For top gems {ruby-toolbox.com}[https://www.ruby-toolbox.com]

== Credits

* {RailsBridge}[http://docs.railsbridge.org/]

* {RailsGirls}[http://railsgirls.com]

* ... and the great documentation provided by so many open source ruby gems out there!

== License

This project is released under the MIT license:

* http://www.opensource.org/licenses/MIT
